.\" PROCESS THIS FILE WITH
.\" groff -man -Tascii mkbiarch.8 
.\" 
.TH mkbiarch 8 "2010-8-24" "LiveCD Tools" "User Manuals"

.SH NAME
mkbiarch.py - make a multiple architecture Live boot disk image
for USB, CF SSD or any disk from 2 architecturally different 
LiveCD ISO9660 image files.

.SH SYNOPSIS
mkbiarch <LiveCDx86ISO>  <LiveCDx64ISO>  <MultipleArch Disk IMG File>

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mkbiarch(8)
create a multiple architecture, bootable Live Disk image file (IMG)
for use on USB or any disk (CF, SSD) 
from 2 LiveCD ISO9660 files of different architecture (ISO).
.BR

.SH USAGE
.B mkbiarch.py
Fedora-13-i686-Live.iso
Fedora-13-x86_64-Live.iso
Fedora-13-MultiArch.img

Then to write it 
/bin/dd if=Fedora-13-MultiArch.img of=/dev/sdb bs=4M

In the above example, mkbiarch.py
creates Fedora-Multi-arch.img
from the two existing ISO9660 LiveCD image files. 
The resulting image file, 
is written to a raw disk device using 
.B dd(1)
.BR


.SH UNDER THE HOOD
.B mkbiarch.py(8)
first checks that the two ISO9660 image files exist. It will create a blank
file using dd(1) writing data from /dev/zero, the size of the two ISO9660 images files combined.
The blank file is then bound via loopback using
.B losetup(8)
partitioned, and bound at an offset via loopback
of 512 bytes, this second loopback device is formatted type ext3 using 
.B mke2fs(8)
This filesystem is mounted using 
.B mount(8)
on a temporary directory. The two ISO9660 files are then mounted via loopback, 
files are copied using shutil module in Python, from them to the newly formatted 
filesystem in the image file. Data is gathered from the ISO9660 image files from it's isolinux.cfg,
after the files are copied the loopbacked ISO9660 image files are released.
.B extlinux(1)
is installed to the loopback mounted filesystem on the target image file and an extlinux.conf
is written. The temporary directories are unmounted using 
.B umount(8)
and the looback devices are released. 
The temporary directories are then removed, and the resulting Multiple Architecture Disk Image
File is moved using shutil to the specified location on the command line, which is provided as 
argument 3 to mkbiarch.py

.SH BUGS
Please report any bugs to 
http://bugzilla.redhat.com 
under component livecd-tools 

.SH AVAILABILITY
To check out the git version of this program
 git clone https://github.com/rhinstaller/livecd-tools

.SH AUTHOR
Jasper Hartline <autopsy@liveprojects.info>

.SH CONTRIBUTORS
.B Richard Shaw <email@address.com> 
pyparted suggestions and feedback

.B Jan Kratochvil <email@address.com>  
for the original bash script which 
the python version was derived 

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR livecd-creator(8),
.BR livecd-iso-to-disk(8),
.BR mke2fs(8),
.BR losetup(8),
.BR dd(1),
.BR exlinux(1)
